README.md, before:

Universal Scene Description Exporter for SketchUp
=================================================

This plug-in adds the ability to export [Pixar's Universal Scene
Description](http://openusd.org/docs/index.html) files from [SketchUp
Pro](https://www.sketchup.com). It has been tested with SketchUp Pro 2016, 2017 and 2018.

It adds three options to the **File**->**Export**->**3D Model** menu:

- Pixar USD binary File (*.usd)
- Pixar USD ASCII File (*.usda)
- Pixar USDZ  File (*.usdz)

There are also options on the export panel to conditionally export
**normals**, **curves**, **edges**, and **lines**, as well as the ability to organize
the USD as a **single file** or as a **set of files** that reference each
other.

The [**usdz**](https://graphics.pixar.com/usd/docs/Usdz-File-Format-Specification.html) files this exporter writes out takes care to write out in a way that is compatible with Apple's [ARKit 2](https://developer.apple.com/arkit/), which is more constrained than the general  [**usdz** specification](https://graphics.pixar.com/usd/docs/Usdz-File-Format-Specification.html), but that support can be toggled on or off programmatically.

The exporter also leverages the new [UsdPreviewSurface](https://graphics.pixar.com/usd/docs/UsdPreviewSurface-Proposal.html) to support texture export from SketchUp.

Getting the Prebuilt Plugin for macOS
------------------------------

We are providing a pre-built version of the plug-in [here](https://github.com/drwave/usd-sketchup/blob/master/USDExporter.plugin.zip). After downloading, you'll want to copy it into the **PlugIns** directory inside the SketchUp Pro app bundle.  You can do this from the Terminal by the following. Note you will need to type an admin password, as that directory is probably write-protected.

```
> sudo cp -rf USDExporter.plugin /Applications/SketchUp\ 2018/SketchUp.app/Contents/PlugIns/
```
Once you have copied it there, you should see the 3 USD export options under the **File**->**Export**->**3D Model** menu.


Getting Help
------------

Need help understanding certain concepts in USD? See [Getting Help
with USD](http://openusd.org/docs/Getting-Help-with-USD.html) or visit
the [forum](https://groups.google.com/forum/#!forum/usd-interest).

If you are experiencing undocumented problems with the software, please 
[file a bug](https://github.com/drwave/usd-sketchup/issues/new).

Supported Platforms
-------------------

SketchUp Pro runs on macOS and Windows, but this plug-in is **currently
only supported on macOS**.

This plug-in was developed on macOS but care has been taken to make
sure that, as much as possible, it should be straightforward to port
to Windows. Both [SketchUp's SDK (*developer account required*)](https://extensions.sketchup.com/en/developer_center/sketchup_sdk) on Windows and macOS contain an
example plug-in called `skp_to_xml`, which this plug-in took
inspiration from, so if someone wants to port this to Windows they
should just need to look in the `SDK/samples/skp_to_xml/win/` and in
the `USD SketchUp Mac` folder here and do the equivalent for Windows.

Dependencies
------------

| Name | Version |
| ---- | ------- |
| [macOS](https://www.apple.com/mac/) | 10.13 or higher | 
| [SketchUp Pro](https://www.sketchup.com/download/all) | 2016 or higher | 
| [Xcode](https://developer.apple.com/xcode) | 9 or higher |
| [SketchUp SDK](https://extensions.sketchup.com/en/developer_center/sketchup_sdk) | recent|
| [USD](https://github.com/PixarAnimationStudios/USD) | 18.09 or higher |


Getting and Building the Code
-----------------------------


#### 1. Install prerequisites (see [Dependencies](#dependencies) for required versions)

Note: to build this plug-in you will need a [SketchUp Developer/Trimble account](https://developer.sketchup.com/en) and an [Apple Developer account](https://developer.apple.com/account/).

The rest of these instructions assume you have a [Mac](https://www.apple.com/mac/) with [Xcode](https://developer.apple.com/xcode) and [SketchUp Pro](https://www.sketchup.com/download/all) installed.

#### 2. Download the USD source code

You can download source code archives from [GitHub](https://www.github.com/PixarAnimationStudios/USD) or use ```git``` to clone the repository.

```
> git clone https://github.com/PixarAnimationStudios/USD
Cloning into 'USD'...
```

#### 3. Run the USD build script

##### MacOS:

In a terminal, run ```xcode-select``` to ensure command line developer tools are 
installed. Then run the script. We recommend building without Python, without imaging, and as a monolithic library that includes tbb in it. The included Xcode project assumes that it has been built that way and installed into ```/opt/local/USDNoPythonNoImagingMonolithicIncludeTBB```.

```
> python USD/build_scripts/build_usd.py --build-args TBB,extra_inc=big_iron.inc --no-python --no-imaging --no-usdview --build-monolithic /opt/local/USDNoPythonNoImagingMonolithicIncludeTBB
```

#### 4. Download the SketchUp SDK

Once you login to the [Trimble/SketchUp developer account](https://extensions.sketchup.com/en/developer_center/sketchup_sdk) (*look in upper right corner of that linked page*), download the [SDK](https://extensions.sketchup.com/en/developer_center/sketchup_sdk). Unzip and install this somewhere on your machine, for example, ```~/SketchUpSDKs/SDK_Mac_18-0-18665```

#### 5. Download the USD SketchUp exporter plug-in source code

You can download source code archives from [GitHub](https://www.github.com/drwave/usd-sketchup) or use ```git``` to clone the repository.

```
> git clone https://github.com/drwave/usd-sketchup
Cloning into 'usd-sketchup'...
```
At the top level of the repository, make a link to the SketchUp SDK you installed. For example, if the SDK you downloaded was ```SDK_Mac_18-0-18665``` and you put it in a subdirectory off your home directory called ```SketchUpSDKs```, you would do:

```
> cd usd-sketchup
> ln -s ~/SketchUpSDKs/SDK_Mac_18-0-18665 SDK_Mac
```
#### 6. Build the USD SketchUp exporter

Launch Xcode on the [project file](https://github.com/drwave/usd-sketchup/tree/master/usd-sketchup.xcodeproj). You may need to fix up various things in the Xcode file that are specific to your build if you have changed them (i.e. installed USD in a different location, have a different version of SketchUp installed, etc.).

You will almost certainly have to update the **Development Team** in the Build Settings (**need a screenshot here**).

The Xcode project assumes that you are building for **SketchUp Pro 2018**, and building the target will actually copy the resulting ```USDExporter.plugin``` into SketchUp Pro's app bundle in the PlugIns directory, i.e. ```/Applications/SketchUp\ 2018/SketchUp.app/Contents/PlugIns/```.

Initially, that directory will probably not be writable on your machine, so you will need to make it writable:

```
> sudo chmod a+w /Applications/SketchUp\ 2018/SketchUp.app/Contents/PlugIns/
```

Copying the plug-in to the directory makes it very easy to debug the plug-in, as you can launch SketchUp Pro from inside of Xcode, set breakpoints in your plug-in, etc. Very handy when doing development.


Contributing
------------

If you'd like to contribute to this USD plug-in (and we appreciate the help!), please see
the [Contributing](http://openusd.org/docs/Contributing-to-USD.html) page in the
documentation for more information.

Commit message:

We now track the export counts much more exactly. Still need to add the shader count, though. Finally moved MeshSubset to its own file. Fixed some bugs in Curves and lines export.

README.md, after:

Universal Scene Description Exporter for SketchUp
=================================================

This plug-in adds the ability to export [Pixar's Universal Scene
Description](http://openusd.org/docs/index.html) files from [SketchUp
Pro](https://www.sketchup.com). It has been tested with SketchUp Pro 2016, 2017 and 2018.

It adds three options to the **File**->**Export**->**3D Model** menu:

- Pixar USD binary File (*.usd)
- Pixar USD ASCII File (*.usda)
- Pixar USDZ  File (*.usdz)

There are also options on the export panel to conditionally export
**normals**, **curves**, **edges**, and **lines**, as well as the ability to organize
the USD as a **single file** or as a **set of files** that reference each
other.

The [**usdz**](https://graphics.pixar.com/usd/docs/Usdz-File-Format-Specification.html) files this exporter writes out takes care to write out in a way that is compatible with Apple's [ARKit 2](https://developer.apple.com/arkit/), which is more constrained than the general  [**usdz** specification](https://graphics.pixar.com/usd/docs/Usdz-File-Format-Specification.html), but that support can be toggled on or off in the **Options...** dialog.

The exporter also leverages the new [UsdPreviewSurface](https://graphics.pixar.com/usd/docs/UsdPreviewSurface-Proposal.html) to support texture export from SketchUp.

Getting the Prebuilt Plugin for macOS
------------------------------

We are providing a pre-built version of the plug-in [here](https://github.com/drwave/usd-sketchup/blob/master/USDExporter.plugin.zip). After downloading, you'll want to copy it into the **PlugIns** directory inside the SketchUp Pro app bundle.  You can do this from the Terminal by the following. Note you will need to type an admin password, as that directory is probably write-protected.

```
> sudo cp -rf USDExporter.plugin /Applications/SketchUp\ 2018/SketchUp.app/Contents/PlugIns/
```
Once you have copied it there, you should see the 3 USD export options under the **File**->**Export**->**3D Model** menu.


Getting Help
------------

Need help understanding certain concepts in USD? See [Getting Help
with USD](http://openusd.org/docs/Getting-Help-with-USD.html) or visit
the [forum](https://groups.google.com/forum/#!forum/usd-interest).

If you are experiencing undocumented problems with the software, please 
[file a bug](https://github.com/drwave/usd-sketchup/issues/new).

Supported Platforms
-------------------

SketchUp Pro runs on macOS and Windows, but this plug-in is **currently
only supported on macOS**.

This plug-in was developed on macOS but care has been taken to make
sure that, as much as possible, it should be straightforward to port
to Windows. Both [SketchUp's SDK (*developer account required*)](https://extensions.sketchup.com/en/developer_center/sketchup_sdk) on Windows and macOS contain an
example plug-in called `skp_to_xml`, which this plug-in took
inspiration from, so if someone wants to port this to Windows they
should just need to look in the `SDK/samples/skp_to_xml/win/` and in
the `USD SketchUp Mac` folder here and do the equivalent for Windows.

Dependencies
------------

| Name | Version |
| ---- | ------- |
| [macOS](https://www.apple.com/mac/) | 10.13 or higher | 
| [SketchUp Pro](https://www.sketchup.com/download/all) | 2016 or higher | 
| [Xcode](https://developer.apple.com/xcode) | 9 or higher |
| [SketchUp SDK](https://extensions.sketchup.com/en/developer_center/sketchup_sdk) | recent|
| [USD](https://github.com/PixarAnimationStudios/USD) | 18.09 or higher |


Getting and Building the Code
-----------------------------


#### 1. Install prerequisites (see [Dependencies](#dependencies) for required versions)

Note: to build this plug-in you will need a [SketchUp Developer/Trimble account](https://developer.sketchup.com/en) and an [Apple Developer account](https://developer.apple.com/account/).

The rest of these instructions assume you have a [Mac](https://www.apple.com/mac/) with [Xcode](https://developer.apple.com/xcode) and [SketchUp Pro](https://www.sketchup.com/download/all) installed.

#### 2. Download the USD source code

You can download source code archives from [GitHub](https://www.github.com/PixarAnimationStudios/USD) or use ```git``` to clone the repository.

```
> git clone https://github.com/PixarAnimationStudios/USD
Cloning into 'USD'...
```

#### 3. Run the USD build script

##### MacOS:

In a terminal, run ```xcode-select``` to ensure command line developer tools are 
installed. Then run the script. We recommend building without Python, without imaging, and as a monolithic library that includes tbb in it. The included Xcode project assumes that it has been built that way and installed into ```/opt/local/USDNoPythonNoImagingMonolithicIncludeTBB```.

```
> python USD/build_scripts/build_usd.py --build-args TBB,extra_inc=big_iron.inc --no-python --no-imaging --no-usdview --build-monolithic /opt/local/USDNoPythonNoImagingMonolithicIncludeTBB
```

#### 4. Download the SketchUp SDK

Once you login to the [Trimble/SketchUp developer account](https://extensions.sketchup.com/en/developer_center/sketchup_sdk) (*look in upper right corner of that linked page*), download the [SDK](https://extensions.sketchup.com/en/developer_center/sketchup_sdk). Unzip and install this somewhere on your machine, for example, ```~/SketchUpSDKs/SDK_Mac_18-0-18665```

#### 5. Download the USD SketchUp exporter plug-in source code

You can download source code archives from [GitHub](https://www.github.com/drwave/usd-sketchup) or use ```git``` to clone the repository.

```
> git clone https://github.com/drwave/usd-sketchup
Cloning into 'usd-sketchup'...
```
At the top level of the repository, make a link to the SketchUp SDK you installed. For example, if the SDK you downloaded was ```SDK_Mac_18-0-18665``` and you put it in a subdirectory off your home directory called ```SketchUpSDKs```, you would do:

```
> cd usd-sketchup
> ln -s ~/SketchUpSDKs/SDK_Mac_18-0-18665 SDK_Mac
```
#### 6. Build the USD SketchUp exporter plugin

Launch Xcode on the [project file](https://github.com/drwave/usd-sketchup/tree/master/usd-sketchup.xcodeproj). You may need to fix up various things in the Xcode file that are specific to your build if you have changed them (i.e. installed USD in a different location, have a different version of SketchUp installed, etc.).

You will almost certainly have to update the **Development Team** in the Build Settings (**need a screenshot here**).

The Xcode project assumes that you are building for **SketchUp Pro 2018**, and building the target will actually copy the resulting ```USDExporter.plugin``` into SketchUp Pro's app bundle in the PlugIns directory, i.e. ```/Applications/SketchUp\ 2018/SketchUp.app/Contents/PlugIns/```.

Initially, that directory will probably not be writable on your machine, so you will need to make it writable:

```
> sudo chmod a+w /Applications/SketchUp\ 2018/SketchUp.app/Contents/PlugIns/
```

Copying the plug-in to the directory makes it very easy to debug the plug-in, as you can launch SketchUp Pro from inside of Xcode, set breakpoints in your plug-in, etc. Very handy when doing development.

#### 6. Build the USD SketchUp exporter command line app

Launch Xcode on the [project file](https://github.com/drwave/usd-sketchup/tree/master/usd-sketchup.xcodeproj). You may need to fix up various things in the Xcode file that are specific to your build if you have changed them (i.e. installed USD in a different location, have a different version of SketchUp installed, etc.).


Contributing
------------

If you'd like to contribute to this USD plug-in (and we appreciate the help!), please see
the [Contributing](http://openusd.org/docs/Contributing-to-USD.html) page in the
documentation for more information.
